The Project Gutenberg EBook of On the Origin of Species by Means of
Natural Selection, by Charles Darwin

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection
       or the Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for
       Life. (2nd edition)

Author: Charles Darwin

Release Date: September 25, 2007 [EBook #22764]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ORIGIN OF SPECIES ***




Produced by Steven Gibbs, Keith Edkins and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





Transcriber's note: A few typographical errors have been corrected: they
are listed at the end of the text.

       *       *       *       *       *


ON THE

ORIGIN OF SPECIES.

       *       *       *       *       *

"But with regard to the material world, we can at least go so far as
this--we can perceive that events are brought about not by insulated
interpositions of Divine power, exerted in each particular case, but by the
establishment of general laws."

WHEWELL: _Bridgewater Treatise_.

"The only distinct meaning of the word 'natural' is _stated_, _fixed_, or
_settled_; since what is natural as much requires and presupposes an
intelligent agent to render it so, _i.e._ to effect it continually or at
stated times, as what is supernatural or miraculous does to effect it for
once."

BUTLER: _Analogy of Revealed Religion_.

"To conclude, therefore, let no man out of a weak conceit of sobriety, or
an ill-applied moderation, think or maintain, that a man can search too far
or be too well studied in the book of God's word, or in the book of God's
works; divinity or philosophy; but rather let men endeavour an endless
progress or proficience in both."

BACON: _Advancement of Learning_.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _Down, Bromley, Kent,_
      _October 1st, 1859._ (_1st Thousand_).

       *       *       *       *       *


ON

THE ORIGIN OF SPECIES

BY MEANS OF NATURAL SELECTION,

OR THE

PRESERVATION OF FAVOURED RACES IN THE STRUGGLE
FOR LIFE.

BY CHARLES DARWIN, M.A.,

FELLOW OF THE ROYAL, GEOLOGICAL, LINNEAN, ETC., SOCIETIES;

AUTHOR OF 'JOURNAL OF RESEARCHES DURING H. M. S. BEAGLE'S VOYAGE
ROUND THE WORLD.'

_FIFTH THOUSAND._

LONDON:
JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET.
1860.

_The right of Translation is reserved._

       *       *       *       *       *

LONDON: PRINTED BY W. CLOWES AND SONS, STAMFORD STREET,
AND CHARING CROSS.

       *       *       *       *       *


{v}

CONTENTS.

       *       *       *       *       *

INTRODUCTION

Page 1

CHAPTER I.

VARIATION UNDER DOMESTICATION.

Causes of Variability--Effects of Habit--Correlation of
Growth--Inheritance--Character of Domestic Varieties--Difficulty of
distinguishing between Varieties and Species--Origin of Domestic Varieties
from one or more Species--Domestic Pigeons, their Differences and
Origin--Principle of Selection anciently followed, its Effects--Methodical
and Unconscious Selection--Unknown Origin of our Domestic
Productions--Circumstances favourable to Man's power of Selection

7-43

CHAPTER II.

VARIATION UNDER NATURE.

Variability--Individual differences--Doubtful species--Wide ranging, much
diffused, and common species vary most--Species of the larger genera in any
country vary more than the species of the smaller genera--Many of the
species of the larger genera resemble varieties in being very closely, but
unequally, related to each other, and in having restricted ranges

44-59

{vi}

CHAPTER III.

STRUGGLE FOR EXISTENCE.

Its bearing on natural selection--The term used in a wide
sense--Geometrical powers of increase--Rapid increase of naturalised
animals and plants--Nature of the checks to increase--Competition
universal--Effects of climate--Protection from the number of
individuals--Complex relations of all animals and plants throughout
nature--Struggle for life most severe between individuals and varieties of
the same species; often severe between species of the same genus--The
relation of organism to organism the most important of all relations

60-79

CHAPTER IV.

NATURAL SELECTION.

Natural Selection--its power compared with man's selection--its power on
characters of trifling importance--its power at all ages and on both
sexes--Sexual Selection--On the generality of intercrosses between
individuals of the same species--Circumstances favourable and unfavourable
to Natural Selection, namely, intercrossing, isolation, number of
individuals--Slow action--Extinction caused by Natural
Selection--Divergence of Character, related to the diversity of inhabitants
of any small area, and to naturalisation--Action of Natural Selection,
through Divergence of Character and Extinction, on the descendants from a
common parent--Explains the Grouping of all organic beings

80-130

CHAPTER V.

LAWS OF VARIATION.

Effects of external conditions--Use and disuse, combined with natural
selection; organs of flight and of vision--Acclimatisation--Correlation of
growth--Compensation and economy of growth--False correlations--Multiple,
rudimentary, and lowly organised structures variable--Parts developed in an
unusual manner are highly variable: specific characters more variable than
generic: secondary sexual characters variable--Species of the same genus
vary in an analogous manner--Reversions to long-lost characters--Summary

131-170

{vii}

CHAPTER VI.

DIFFICULTIES ON THEORY.

Difficulties on the theory of descent with
modification--Transitions--Absence or rarity of transitional
varieties--Transitions in habits of life--Diversified habits in the same
species--Species with habits widely different from those of their
allies--Organs of extreme perfection--Means of transition--Cases of
difficulty--Natura non facit saltum--Organs of small importance--Organs not
in all cases absolutely perfect--The law of Unity of Type and of the
Conditions of Existence embraced by the theory of Natural Selection

171-206

CHAPTER VII.

INSTINCT.

Instincts comparable with habits, but different in their origin--Instincts
graduated--Aphides and ants--Instincts variable--Domestic instincts, their
origin--Natural instincts of the cuckoo, ostrich, and parasitic
bees--Slave-making ants--Hive-bee, its cell-making instinct--Difficulties
on the theory of the Natural Selection of instincts--Neuter or sterile
insects--Summary

207-244

CHAPTER VIII.

HYBRIDISM.

Distinction between the sterility of first crosses and of
hybrids--Sterility various in degree, not universal, affected by close
interbreeding, removed by domestication--Laws governing the sterility of
hybrids--Sterility not a special endowment, but incidental on other
differences--Causes of the sterility of first crosses and of
hybrids--Parallelism between the effects of changed conditions of life and
crossing--Fertility of varieties when crossed and of their mongrel
offspring not universal--Hybrids and mongrels compared independently of
their fertility--Summary

245-278

{viii}

CHAPTER IX.

ON THE IMPERFECTION OF THE GEOLOGICAL RECORD.

On the absence of intermediate varieties at the present day--On the nature
of extinct intermediate varieties; on their number--On the vast lapse of
time, as inferred from the rate of deposition and of denudation--On the
poorness of our palæontological collections--On the intermittence of
geological formations--On the absence of intermediate varieties in any one
formation--On the sudden appearance of groups of species--On their sudden
appearance in the lowest known fossiliferous strata

279-311

CHAPTER X.

ON THE GEOLOGICAL SUCCESSION OF ORGANIC BEINGS.

On the slow and successive appearance of new species--On their different
rates of change--Species once lost do not reappear--Groups of species
follow the same general rules in their appearance and disappearance as do
single species--On Extinction--On simultaneous changes in the forms of life
throughout the world--On the affinities of extinct species to each other
and to living species--On the state of development of ancient forms--On the
succession of the same types within the same areas--Summary of preceding
and present chapters

